# Misc responses to reviewers

Notes (delete these)

We discovered that the distribution of lifetime partners was highly overdispersed due to 82 individuals who reported very high numbers of partners, all exceeding 100 and a few exceeding 1000, compared to the median value of 5. Because our sample is large and nationally representative it is plausible that it includes some sex workers, as well as individuals who use their services. We decided to restrict our sample to individuals with fewer than 100 lifetime sex partners for three reasons: first, numbers of sex partners that exceed 100 is probably an evolutionary novelty. Second, there was an unusually high number of exactly 100 lifetime sex partners, suggesting inaccurate recollections. Third, our statistical models do not easily accommodate the high degree of overdispersion caused by these few exceptionally high partner numbers. Our extensive simulations showed that high overdispersion would reduce our statistical power.

Refitting all our pilot models on our slightly reduced dataset, we now find consistent and strong support for the predicted main effects of male strength on partnered status and lifetime partners (95% CIs well-away from 0), and also consistent support for last year partners (albeit with 95% CIs much close to 0) and age at first sex. We also find consistent support for a negative interaction of strength with female sex for number of lifetime partners and for partnered status (i.e., a significantly stronger effect of strength for men than women), but not for partners in the last year, nor age at first sex. We therefore now make these the central predictions of our registered report. Because the 95% CIs for the interaction terms are close to 0, 


As we now clarify, we propose that for both men and women, partner number is an ambiguous index of mating success: it could represent mate search effort for both sexes (i.e., both sexes will need to mate with multiple partners to find the best partner they can), it could represent mating failure for both sexes, it could represent coercive mating, or it could, as Reviewer 1 rightly emphasizes, index reproductive success mainly for men. We now argue that the latter interpretation is probably weaker for men than it seems because in ancestral populations, short term mating probably didn’t often result in the survival and reproduction of many offspring compared to long-term mating. In short, we propose that ancestrally, long-term mating success, which we operationalize in our study as married or partnered, was the strongest positive predictor of fitness.

When it comes to partner number, it was polygyny, i.e., men investing in long-term relationships with two or more wives, rather than partner number per se, that primarily increased biological fitness. On this view, as we now discuss, the advantage of higher male body strength was as much for an increased ability to provision mates as it was for male-male competition.

How, then, to theoretically conceptualize partner number in societies like the US with socially imposed monogamy? Although we do not deny that successful short term matings might have increased male fitness at the margins, we propose that partner numbers might better represent mate search. 

In support of our reframing to emphasize the importance of long-term mateships for biological fitness, with partner numbers indexing mate search, the meta-analysis of von Rueden and Jaeggi (2016) found that, in polygynous societies, male status (of which physical formidability is one component) was strongly associated with surviving offspring, likely due to provisioning, in addition to fertility and mating success.

In our view, there is solid cross-cultural evidence for the importance of biparental care in long-term mating relationships to successfully raising offspring. In particular, pair-bonds are highly stable across cultures when both partners contribute to subsistence (Quinlan, 2008), and in hunter-gatherers, female productivity alone is not sufficient to provision offspring (Davison and Gurven, 2021, 2022). Together with the cross-cultural ubiquity of pair bonding (Brown 1991), most evolutionary anthropologists see pair bonds and biparental care as defining traits of Homo sapiens.
